Acronis
Type Privately held company
Industry Software
Genre Technology
Founded 2003
Founder Serguei Beloussov, Max Tsypliaev, Ilya Zubarev, Stanislav Protassov
Headquarters Rheinweg 9, 8200 Schaffhausen , Switzerland
Number of locations 18
Area served Worldwide
Key people Serguei Beloussov (CEO), John Zanni (President)
Products Acronis True Image, Acronis Disk Director, Acronis Migrate Easy, Acronis Backup, Acronis Access, Acronis Storage, Acronis DR Service, Acronis SnapDeploy
Number of employees more than 1000 (2018)
Website wwwacroniscom/
Acronis International GmbH, simply referred to as Acronis, is a global technology company with Corporate Headquarters in Schaffhausen, Switzerland and International Headquarters in Singapore. Acronis develops on-premises and cloud software for backup, disaster recovery, and secure file sync and share and data access. Acronis has 18 offices worldwide. Its R&D Centers, Acronis Labs, are based in the United States and Singapore. Acronis has Cloud data centers internationally, including the United States, France, Singapore, Japan, and Germany.
Acronis was founded by Serguei Beloussov, Ilya Zubarev, Stanislav Protassov and Max Tsyplyaev in 2001 as a separate business unit within SWsoft. In 2003, Acronis was spun off as a separate company. The company moved from a focus on disk partitioning and boot loader software to a focus on backup and disaster recovery software based on disk imaging technology.
In 2006, SWsoft partnered with Acronis to resell Acronis True Image Server for SWsoft Plesk 8.1 control panel software. The software is standalone and works with other control panels, which enables service providers to offer backup and recovery capabilities with dedicated hosting packages.
In September 2012, Acronis acquired GroupLogic, Inc., which allowed Acronis to integrate mobile devices, including Apple, into enterprise environments through acquisition of software that formed Acronis Access Advanced. The acquisition expanded Acronis’ data protection on mobile devices. GroupLogic gained access to Acronis’ customer base.
In May 2013, co-founder and Board Director, Serguei Beloussov, returned as CEO after working on other ventures. In December that same year, Acronis announced the launch of an official research and development wing, Acronis Labs.
Acronis won the Mobility Product of the Year award at the Network Computing Awards in 2014. In 2014, Acronis acquired BackupAgent, a cloud backup company, and nScaled, a disaster recovery software company.
The Global Partner Program through Acronis was launched in March 2015. The program gives partner companies access to the Acronis AnyData Engine. Also in 2015, Acronis won the ChannelPro Readers’ Choice Award for Best Backup and Disaster Recovery Vendor. In July 2015, Acronis announced a partnership with ProfitBrick to make Acronis Backup Cloud available for ProfitBrick’s cloud computing platform. In 2019, it was announced that Acronis would sponsor the ROKiT Williams F1 Team and SportPesa Racing Point.
Acronis develops backup, disaster recovery, secure file access, sync and share, and partitioning software for the home, and small to medium-sized enterprises. Its backup software includes Acronis True Image which uses full-system image backup technology. The Acronis Cloud platform includes backups, disaster recovery, and file sync and share for a set of cloud applications which are delivered by service providers.
Acronis Backup and Acronis Backup Advanced are a disk-based backup and recovery programs. Aside from backup software, Acronis also created Acronis Disk Director which is a shareware application that partitions a machine and allows it to run multiple operating systems, Acronis Snap Deploy which creates a standard configuration to easily organize new machines, Acronis Files Advanced which secures access to files that are synced between devices, and Acronis Access Connect, which is designed for Mac clients and runs on Windows servers. Acronis Data Protection Platform includes backup, disaster recover, and secure file sync and share.
