Alki David

Born Alkiviades David May 1968 Lagos, Lagos State, Nigeria
Occupation Entrepreneur, film producer
Net worth US$17 billion 14 billion (May 2014, Alki David and the Leventis family)
Spouse(s) Emma McAllister (m 20072009) Jennifer Stano (m 2011)
Children 2

Alkiviades David (born May 1968; pronounced /ˈælki/ AL-kee) is a Greek billionaire heir, a member of the Leventis family, whose holdings include manufacturing, bottling plants, property and shipping. In 2008 he was the majority shareholder of Leventis-David Group, which owns Coca-Cola Hellenic bottling plants in 28 countries. His companies include the Internet-based television provider FilmOn, the home-shopping website 9021go.com, the streaming-video site BattleCam.com, and the modeling agency Independent Models. He has also appeared in feature films and on television.
Alkiviades David was born in May 1968, in Lagos, Nigeria, to a trading and shipping family of Greek Cypriot origin. His father, Andrew A. David (1934-2000), was born in Petra, Cyprus and went on to study business at Trinity College in Dublin, Ireland. In 1957, Andrew A. David joined the family business, the Leventis-David Group in Ghana, where he managed Coca-Cola Bottling Plant in Accra.
David attended high school in Switzerland and studied film at the Royal College of Art.[citation needed]
In 1998, he co-founded the London modeling agency Independent Models, whose models included Helena Christensen.
In 2006, David partnered with veteran film producer Elliott Kastner to launch 111 Pictures Ltd., a UK-based independent production and international sales company.[citation needed] Also that year, David started FilmOn, an online streaming site.
He has appeared in films, including a 2008 motion picture, The Bank Job, in which David played a bank-vault expert hired by Jason Statham to help with a bank heist.
He founded the nonprofit organization BIOS to conserve, protect, and educate people on marine conservation around the Greek islands.[citation needed]
David has been married three times and divorced twice, and has two sons, Andrew and Alexander, with his first wife. He met second wife Emma McAllister in 2004, marrying her in 2007, and separating in 2009. As of 2011 he is married to Jennifer Stano, a swimsuit designer and former model who founded Have Faith Swimwear with David in Beverly Hills, California, in 2010. In May 2019, it was reported that David was arrested in St. Kitts after US$1.5 million of cannabis was found on his private plane.
David's projects include:
CBS, ABC, NBC, Fox Broadcasting and their studios won a temporary restraining order against David's FilmOn in November 2010 to prevent unlicensed use of their broadcast signals. David sued CBS, dropped the suit, and sued CBS Interactive in November 2011, alleging copyright infringement due to the CNET website having editorially covered infringing uses of peer-to-peer file-sharing software. In June 2013, David filed a countersuit against the four networks seeking a ruling that providing Internet technology for receiving over-the-air broadcast signals at no charge does not violate broadcasters' copyrights.
In April 2019 a jury decided David should pay $11 million in damages to a woman who accused him of sexual assault, including $8 million in punitive damages and $3 million in compensatory damages.
The woman accused David of firing her after she turned down his sexual advances and alleged he groped her in the workplace. Her complaint also accused him of showing lewd photos to employees and hiring a stripper in the workplace.
