Fujitsu
Shiodome City Center, Fujitsu's world headquarters in Tokyo, Japan
Native name 
Type Public (KK)
Traded as TYO: 6702 TOPIX Large 70 Component
ISIN JP3818000006
Industry Computer hardware Computer software IT services IT consulting Telecommunications
Founded June 20, 1935; 84 years ago (1935 06 20) (as Fuji Telecommunications Equipment Manufacturing) Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan
Headquarters Shiodome City Center, Minato, Tokyo , Japan
Area served Worldwide
Key people Masami Yamamoto (Chairman) Tatsuya Tanaka (President)
Products See products listing
Revenue 4098 trillion (2018)[* 1]
Operating income 1825 billion (2018)[* 1]
Net income 1693 billion (2018)[* 1]
Total assets 3121 trillion (2018)[* 1]
Total equity 1087 trillion (2018)[* 1]
Number of employees 140,365 (2018)
Parent Furukawa Group
Website wwwfujitsucom
Footnotes / references ^ a b c d e "FY 2017 Full Year Financial Results" (PDF) Retrieved April 29, 2017

Fujitsu Ltd. (富士通株式会社, Fujitsū Kabushiki-gaisha) is a Japanese multinational information technology equipment and services company headquartered in Tokyo, Japan. In 2018, it was the world's fourth-largest IT services provider measured by global IT services revenue (after IBM, Accenture and AWS). Fortune named Fujitsu as one of the world's most admired companies and a Global 500 company.
Fujitsu mainly makes computing products, but the company and its subsidiaries also offer a diversity of products and services in the areas of personal computing, enterprise computing, including x86, SPARC and mainframe compatible server products, as well as storage products, telecommunications, advanced microelectronics, and air conditioning. It has approximately 140,000 employees and its products and services are available in over 100 countries.
Fujitsu is listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the Nikkei 225 and TOPIX indices.
Fujitsu is the second oldest IT company after IBM and before Hewlett Packard, established on June 20, 1935, under the name Fuji Telecommunications Equipment Manufacturing (富士電気通信機器製造, Fuji Denki Tsūshin Kiki Seizō), as a spin-off of the Fuji Electric Company, itself a joint venture between the Furukawa Electric Company and the German conglomerate Siemens which had been founded in 1923. Despite its connections to the Furukawa zaibatsu, Fujitsu escaped the Allied occupation of Japan after the Second World War mostly unscathed.
In 1954, Fujitsu manufactured Japan's first computer, the FACOM 100 mainframe, and in 1961 launched its second generation computers (transitorized) the FACOM 222 mainframe. The 1968 FACOM230 "5" Series marked the beginning of its third generation computers. Fujitsu offered mainframe computers from 1955 until at least 2002 Fujitsu's computer products have included minicomputers, small business computers, servers and personal computers.
In 1955, Fujitsu founded Kawasaki Frontale as a company football club; Kawasaki Frontale has been a J. League football club since 1999. In 1967, the company's name was officially changed to the contraction Fujitsū (富士通). Since 1985, the company also fields a company American football team, the Fujitsu Frontiers, who play in the corporate X-League, have appeared in 7 Japan X Bowls, winning two, and winning two Rice Bowls.
In 1971, Fujitsu signed an OEM agreement with the Canadian company Consolidated Computers Limited (CCL) to distribute CCL's data entry product, Key-Edit. Fujitsu joined both ICL who earlier began marketing Key-Edit in the British Commonwealth of countries as well as in both western and eastern Europe; and CCL's direct marketing staff in Canada, USA, London (UK) and Frankfurt. Mers Kutt, inventor of Key-Edit and founder of CCL, was the common thread that led to Fujitsu's later association with ICL and Gene Amdahl.
In 1986, Fujitsu and The Queen's University of Belfast business incubation unit (QUBIS Ltd) established a joint venture called Kainos, a privately held software company based in Belfast, Northern Ireland.
In 1990, Fujitsu acquired 80% of the UK-based computer company International Computers Limited (ICL) for $1.29 billion (ICL was renamed Fujitsu Services in 2002). In September 1990, Fujitsu announced the launch of a new series of mainframe computers which were at that time the fastest in the world. In July 1991, Fujitsu acquired more than half of the Russian company KME-CS (Kazan Manufacturing Enterprise of Computer Systems).
In 1992, Fujitsu introduced the world's first 21-inch full-color plasma display. It was a hybrid, based upon the plasma display created at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and NHK STRL, achieving superior brightness.
In 1993, Fujitsu formed a flash memory manufacturing joint venture with AMD, Spansion. As part of the transaction, AMD contributed its flash memory group, Fab 25 in Texas, its R&D facilities and assembly plants in Thailand, Malaysia and China; Fujitsu provided its Flash memory business division and the Malaysian Fujitsu Microelectronics final assembly and test operations.
From February 1989 until mid-1997, Fujitsu built the FM Towns PC variant. It started as a proprietary PC variant intended for multimedia applications and computer games, but later became more compatible with regular PCs. In 1993, the FM Towns Marty was released, a gaming console compatible with the FM Towns games.
Fujitsu agreed to acquire the 58 percent of Amdahl Corporation (including the Canada-based DMR consulting group) that it did not already own for around $850 million in July 1997.
In April 1997, the company acquired a 30 percent stake in GLOVIA International, Inc., an El Segundo, Calif., manufacturing ERP software provider whose software it had begun integrating into its electronics plants starting in 1994.
In June 1999 Fujitsu's historical connection with Siemens was revived, when the two companies agreed to merge their European computer operations into a new 50:50 joint venture called Fujitsu Siemens Computers, which became the world's fifth-largest computer manufacturing company.
In April 2000, Fujitsu acquired the remaining 70% of GLOVIA International.
In April 2002 ICL re-branded itself as Fujitsu. On March 2, 2004, Fujitsu Computer Products of America lost a class action lawsuit over hard disk drives with defective chips and firmware. In October 2004, Fujitsu acquired the Australian subsidiary of Atos Origin, a systems implementation company with around 140 employees which specialized in SAP.
In August 2007, Fujitsu signed a £500 million, 10-year deal with Reuters Group under which Reuters outsourced the majority of its internal IT department to Fujitsu. As part of the agreement around 300 Reuters staff and 200 contractors transferred to Fujitsu. In October 2007, Fujitsu announced that it would be establishing an offshore development centre in Noida, India with a capacity to house 1,200 employees, in an investment of US$10 million.
In October 2007, Fujitsu's Australia and New Zealand subsidiary acquired Infinity Solutions Ltd, a New Zealand-based IT hardware, services and consultancy company, for an undisclosed amount.
In January 2009, Fujitsu reached an agreement to sell its HDD business to Toshiba. Transfer of the business was completed on October 1. 2009.
In March 2009, Fujitsu announced that it had decided to convert FDK Corporation, at that time an equity-method affiliate, to a consolidated subsidiary from May 1, 2009 (tentative schedule) by subscribing to a private placement to increase FDK's capital. On April 1, 2009, Fujitsu agreed to acquire Siemens' stake in Fujitsu Siemens Computers for approximately EUR450m. Fujitsu Siemens Computers was subsequently renamed Fujitsu Technology Solutions.
In April 2009, Fujitsu acquired Australian software company Supply Chain Consulting for $48 million deal, just weeks after purchasing the Telstra subsidiary Kaz for $200 million.
Concerning of Net loss forecast amounted 95 billion yen in the year ending March 2013, in February 2013 Fujitsu announced to cut 5,000 jobs which 3,000 jobs in Japan and the rest overseas from its 170,000 employees. Fujitsu will also merge its Large Scale Integrated chip business with that of Panasonic Corporation.
In 2014, after severe losses, Fujitsu spun off its semiconductor division as Mie Fujitsu semiconductor, that was later bought in 2018 by United Microelectronics Corporation.
In 2015, Fujitsu Celebrates 80 years since establishment and on the IT side are currently embarked upon the Fujitsu 2015 World Tour which has included 15 major cities globally and been visited by over 10,000 IT professionals with Fujitsu presenting its take on the future of Hyper Connectivity and Human Centric Computing.
In April 2015 GLOVIA International is renamed FUJITSU GLOVIA, Inc.
In November 2015, Fujitsu Limited and VMware announced new areas of collaboration to empower customers with flexible and secure cloud technologies. It also acquired USharesoft which provides enterprise-class application delivery software for automating the build, migration and governance of applications in multi-cloud environments.
In January 2016, Fujitsu Network Communications Inc. announced a new suite of layered products to advance software-defined networking (SDN) for carriers, service providers and cloud builders. Virtuora NC, based on open standards, is described by Fujitsu as "a suite of standards-based, multi-layered, multi-vendor network automation and virtualization products" that "has been hands-on hardened by some of the largest global service providers."
In 2017, Fujitsu sold its PC business to Lenovo. 
Fujitsu Laboratories, Fujitsu's Research and Development division, has 1,300 employees and a capital of 5 Billion Yen. It is run by Tatsuo Tomita.
In 2012, Fujitsu announced that it had developed new technology for non-3D camera phones. The technology will allow the camera phones to take 3D photos.
Fujitsu Electronics Europe GmbH entered the market as a global distributor on January 1, 2016.
Fujitsu Consulting is the consulting and services arm of the Fujitsu group, providing information technology consulting, implementation and management services.
Fujitsu Consulting was founded in 1973 in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, under its original name "DMR" (an acronym of the three founder's names: Pierre Ducros, Serge Meilleur and Alain Roy) During the next decade, the company established a presence throughout Quebec and Canada, before extending its reach to international markets. For nearly thirty years, DMR Consulting grew to become an international consulting firm, changing its name to Fujitsu Consulting in 2002 after being acquired by Fujitsu Ltd.
Fujitsu operates a division of the company in India, resulting from an acquisition of North America-based company, Rapidigm. It has offshore divisions at Noida, Pune, Hyderabad, Chennai and Bangalore with Pune being the head office. Fujitsu Consulting India launched its second $10 million development center at Noida in October 2007, a year after starting operation in the country. Following the expansion plan, Fujitsu Consulting India launched the fourth development center in Bengaluru In Nov 2011.
Fujitsu Ltd. has a 42% shareholding in Fujitsu General, which manufactures and markets various air conditioning units and humidity control solutions under the General & Fujitsu brands. In India, Fujitsu General has a joint venture with ETA-Ascon which manufactures and sells air conditioners under the General brand.
PFU Limited, headquartered in Ishikawa, Japan is a wholly owned subsidiary of Fujitsu Limited. PFU Limited was established in 1960, has approximately 4,600 employees globally and in 2013 turned over 126.4 billion Yen (US$1.2 Billion). PFU manufactures interactive kiosks, keyboards, network security hardware, embedded computers and imaging products (document scanners) all under the PFU or Fujitsu brand. In addition to hardware PFU also produce desktop and enterprise document capture software and document management software products. PFU has overseas Sales & Marketing offices in Germany (PFU Imaging Solutions Europe Limited), Italy (PFU Imaging Solutions Europe Limited), United Kingdom (PFU Imaging Solutions Europe Limited)and United States of America ( Fujitsu Computer Products of America Inc). PFU Limited are responsible for the design, development, manufacture, sales and support of document scanners which are sold under the Fujitsu brand. Fujitsu are market leaders in professional document scanners with their best selling fi-series, Scansnap and ScanPartner product families as well as Paperstream IP, Paperstream Capture, ScanSnap Manager, ScanSnap Home, Cardminder, Magic Desktop and Rack2Filer software products.
Fujitsu Glovia, a wholly owned subsidiary of Fujitsu Ltd., is a discrete manufacturing enterprise resource planning software vendor based in El Segundo, California, with international operations in the Netherlands, Japan and the United Kingdom. The company offers on-premise and cloud-based ERP manufacturing software under the Glovia G2 brand, and software as a service (SaaS) under the brand Glovia OM. The company was established in 1970 as Xerox Computer Services, where it developed inventory, manufacturing and financial applications. Fujitsu acquired 30 percent of the renamed Glovia International in 1997 and the remaining 70 percent stake in 2000.
Fujitsu Client Computing Limited (FCCL), headquartered in Kawasaki, Kanagawa, the city where the company was founded, is the division of Fujitsu responsible for research, development, design, manufacturing and sales of consumer PC products. Formerly a wholly owned subsidiary, in November 2017, FCCL was spun off into a joint venture with Lenovo and Development Bank of Japan (DBJ). The new company retains the same name, and Fujitsu is still responsible for sales and support of the products; however, Lenovo owns a majority stake at 51%, while Fujitsu retains 44%. The remaining 5% stake is held by DBJ.
Fujitsu's computing product lines include:
In May 2011, Fujitsu decided to enter the mobile phone space again, Microsoft announcing plans that Fujitsu would release Windows Phone devices.
Fujitsu PRIMERGY and ETERNUS are distributed by TriTech Distribution Limited in Hong Kong.
LIFEBOOK, AMILO: Fujitsu's range of notebook computers and tablet PCs.
Fujitsu offers a public cloud service delivered from data centers in Japan, Australia, Singapore, the United States, the United Kingdom and Germany based on its Global Cloud Platform strategy announced in 2010. The platform delivers Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) – virtual information and communication technology (ICT) infrastructure, such as servers and storage functionality – from Fujitsu's data centers. In Japan, the service was offered as the On-Demand Virtual System Service (OViSS) and was then launched globally as Fujitsu Global Cloud Platform/S5 (FGCP/S5). Since July 2013 the service has been called IaaS Trusted Public S5. Globally, the service is operated from Fujitsu data centers located in Australia, Singapore, the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and Japan.
Fujitsu has also launched a Windows Azure powered Global Cloud Platform in a partnership with Microsoft. This offering, delivering Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), was known as FGCP/A5 in Japan but has since been renamed FUJITSU Cloud PaaS A5 for Windows Azure. It is operated from a Fujitsu data center in Japan. It offers a set of application development frameworks, such as Microsoft .NET, Java and PHP, and data storage capabilities consistent with the Windows Azure platform provided by Microsoft. The basic service consists of compute, storage, Microsoft SQL Azure, and Windows Azure AppFabric technologies such as Service Bus and Access Control Service, with options for inter-operating services covering implementation and migration of applications, system building, systems operation, and support.
Fujitsu acquired RunMyProcess in April 2013, a Cloud-based integration Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) specialized in workflow automation and business application development.
Fujitsu has launched their Cloud Service K5 offering with Availability Zones currently deployed in Japan and the UK, further deployments are progressing across Europe. Cloud Service K5 is based on open-standard technologies and can be consumed as a Public Cloud, Virtual Private Cloud or a Private Cloud.
Fujitsu offers local cloud platforms, such as in Australia, that provide the ability to rely on its domestic data centers which keep sensitive financial data under local jurisdiction and compliance standards.
Fujitsu produces the SPARC-compliant CPU (SPARClite), the "Venus" 128 GFLOP SPARC64 VIIIfx model is included in the K computer, the world's fastest supercomputer in June 2011 with a rating of over 8 petaflops, and in November 2011, K became the first computer to top 10 petaflops in September 2011.
The Fujitsu FR, FR-V and ARM architecture microprocessors are widely used, additionally in ASICs and Application-specific standard products (ASSP) like the Milbeaut with customer variants named Nikon Expeed. They were acquired by Spansion in 2013.
The old slogan "The possibilities are infinite" can be found below the company's logo on major advertisements and ties in with the small logo above the letters J and I of the word Fujitsu. This smaller logo represents the symbol for infinity. As of April 2010, Fujitsu is in the process of rolling out a new slogan focused on entering into partnerships with its customers and retiring the "possibilities are infinite" tagline. The new slogan is "shaping tomorrow with you".
Fujitsu reports that all its notebook and tablet PCs released globally comply with the latest Energy Star standard.
Greenpeace's Cool IT Leaderboard of February 2012 "evaluates global IT companies on their leadership in the fight to stop climate change" and ranks Fujitsu 3rd out of 21 leading manufacturers, on the strength of "well-developed case study data of its solutions with transparent methodology" and " out in the Leaderboard for scoring high in the Future Savings Goal criterion."
