Intergraph
Type Subsidiary
Industry Software Geographic Information Systems [httpgraph/  ID__13799  /free co factsheetxhtml]
Founded 1969
Headquarters Huntsville, Alabama, United States
Key people Ola Rollen, CEO Mattias Stenberg, President, Hexagon PPM Steven Cost, President, Hexagon Safety & Infrastructure Mladen Stojic, President, Hexagon Geospatial
Revenue $8084 million USD (2008)
Number of employees 4,000
Parent Hexagon
Website hexagonppmcom
Intergraph Corporation was an American software development and services company, which now forms part of Hexagon AB. It provides enterprise engineering and geospatially powered software to businesses, governments, and organizations around the world, and operates through three divisions: Hexagon PPM, Hexagon Safety & Infrastructure, and Hexagon Geospatial. The company’s headquarters is in Huntsville, Alabama, United States.
In 2008, Intergraph was one of the one hundred largest software companies in the world. In July 2010, Intergraph was acquired by Hexagon AB.
Intergraph was founded in 1969 as M&S Computing, Inc., by former IBM engineers Jim Meadlock, his wife Nancy, Terry Schansman (the S of M&S), Keith Schonrock, and Robert Thurber who had been working with NASA and the U.S. Army in developing systems that would apply digital computing to real time missile guidance. The company was later renamed to Intergraph Corporation in 1980.
One of Intergraph's major hardware projects was developing a line of workstations using the Clipper architecture created by Fairchild Semiconductor. Intergraph was one of only two companies to use the chips in a major product line. Intergraph developed their own version of UNIX for the architecture, which they called CLIX. In 1987, Intergraph bought the Fairchild division responsible for the chip.
In 1997, Intergraph began pursuing litigation against Intel and other computer hardware manufacturers based on the intellectual property developed in Clipper. Intergraph negotiated major settlements with Intel, HP, TI  and Gateway, earning the company over $394M. In 2000, Intergraph exited the hardware business and became purely a software company. On July 21, 2000, it sold its Intense3D graphics accelerator division to 3Dlabs, and its workstation and server division to Silicon Graphics.
On November 29, 2006, Intergraph was acquired by an investor group led by Hellman & Friedman LLC, Texas Pacific Group and JMI Equity, making the company privately held. On October 28, 2010, Intergraph was acquired by Hexagon AB. The transaction marks the return of Intergraph as part of a publicly traded company.
As part of the Hexagon acquisition, Hexagon moved the management of ERDAS, Inc. from under Leica Geosystems to Intergraph, and Z/I Imaging airborne imaging sensors from under Intergraph to Leica Geosystems.
On December 2, 2013, the geospatial technology portfolio was split out from under the Intergraph Security, Government and Infrastructure division to form the Hexagon Geospatial division. On October 13, 2015, the Intergraph Security, Government & Infrastructure division was rebranded as Hexagon Safety & Infrastructure. On January 9, 2017, the Intergraph Government Solutions division was rebranded as Hexagon US Federal.
On June 5, 2017, the Intergraph Process, Power & Marine division was rebranded as Hexagon PPM.
Official website
