Karan Singh Grover


Karan Singh Grover (born 23 February 1982) is an Indian model and actor known for his work in Indian television series such as Dill Mill Gayye and Qubool Hai. He has also starred in the Indian films Alone and Hate Story 3.
In 2019, Grover made a comeback to television with Kasautii Zindagii Kay as Mr. Rishabh Bajaj, Grover reportedly charged 3 lakhs per day for the role, making him the highest paid TV actor yet. In 2019, Grover also made his digital debut with BOSS: Baap of Special Services.
Grover was born on 23 February 1982 in New Delhi, India to a Punjabi Sikh family. He has one younger brother. When Grover was young his family moved to Al Khobar, Saudi Arabia. He did his schooling in Dammam, Saudi Arabia, and then pursued a degree in Hotel Management from IHM Mumbai. He then worked as a Marketing Executive in the Sheraton Hotel in Oman.
In 2004, Grover pursued a career in modelling and participated in the Gladrags Manhunt Contest and won the award of the "Most Popular Model." Grover began his television career with Balaji Telefilms' youth show Kitni Mast Hai Zindagi on MTV India, for which he was chosen for after a nationwide talent hunt conducted by the production house.
In 2007, Grover starred in the show Dill Mill Gayye, a medical youth drama. The Times of India reported that Grover became an "instant hit" and a "teenage icon" due to the show, and that the show became the no.1 show of STAR One. Whilst shooting for Dill Mill Gayye, Grover also participated in a few reality shows and was also seen in several advertisements.
Two years later, Cinevistaas Limited stated that they have lodged a complaint against Grover for routinely reporting hours late for work, which made them incur a loss. Grover left the show for a while, but returned after 6 months due to fan demands. The show ended on 29 October 2010. After Dill Mill Gayye, Grover did two shows with Cinevistaas Limited, he featured in their telefilm Teri Meri Love Stories, and made a cameo appearance in Dil Dosti Dance.
On 29 October 2012, Grover returned to daily fiction with 4 Lions Films' Qubool Hai. The show gained popularity quite early becoming the number 2 show of Indian Television. The Times of India gave Grover the credit for the high television ratings of the show. Grover won two Best Actor Popular Awards for his portrayal of Asad Ahmed Khan in the show. In 2013, Grover was described as one of the highest paid Indian Television Actors.
Grover's work at Qubool Hai ended at the end of 2013. The channel, Zee TV, said that it had fired him because of his unprofessional behaviour. He denied the allegations, saying that the channel was trying to defame him, and stated that he left because his contract ended and due to ill health. Grover's exit caused a sizeable drop in the ratings of the show.
In 2015, Grover featured in the films Alone and Hate Story 3. Hate Story 3 became a box office success. International Business Times reviewed Hate Story 3 and wrote "Audiences say Karan Singh Grover steals the show."
Grover is the brand ambassador of designer Rocky S's signature Brand RS along with Bipasha Basu. He is also the brand ambassador for UM Motorcycles. In 2018, he modeled clothing during the Lakme Fashion Week.
Grover in August 2019 made his digital debut in Ekta Kapoor's/ Alt Balaji's web series Boss – Baap of Special Services. In June 2019, he also made a comeback to television after six years with Kasautii Zindagii Kay as Mr. Rishabh Bajaj. This made Grover the highest paid TV actor, as he was charging 3 lakhs per day. In October Grover quit the show, fans requested him to make a comeback.
Grover will soon be shooting for the second season of BOSS: Baap of Special Services. Grover has also signed the projects 3 Dev, Firrkie and Aadat Diaries.
Grover married actress Shraddha Nigam on 2 December 2008. The marriage ended in divorce after 10 months. Grover married Jennifer Winget, on 9 April 2012. The couple separated in 2014. Grover married actress Bipasha Basu on 30 April 2016. Grover has stated that he is not religious but is spiritual, and that he is a fitness enthusiast.
