Jay and Silent Bob Reboot
Jay and Silent Bob Reboot is a 2019 American buddy comedy film written, directed, edited and starring Kevin Smith. Referring to his 2001 comedy Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, Smith has described the film as "literally the same fuсking movie all over again". It is the seventh film in the View Askewniverse. The film also stars Jason Mewes, and features cameos from Jason Lee, Shannon Elizabeth, Rosario Dawson and Ben Affleck.
It was theatrically released with sessions around North America on October 15 and 17, 2019 and had the second highest per-screen average of 2019 (behind Parasite), thanks to its ongoing travelling roadshow.
In Leonardo, New Jersey, Jay and Silent Bob (Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith) are getting by through growing marijuana in the old RST Video Store, disguised as a chicken sandwich restaurant called "Cock Smoker". They are raided by a SWAT team and taken to court where they are appointed a lawyer (Justin Long), who makes them sign a document before the trial begins. The lawyer then convinces the judge (Craig Robinson) that their business was actually a temporary pop-up shop promoting an upcoming movie. Jay and Silent Bob win their freedom, but another trial immediately begins. The lawyer switches sides, defending a representative of Saban Films, who optioned Bluntman and Chronic. As Saban is planning a big-budget reboot, Bluntman v Chronic, the lawyer claims that Jay and Bob had legally signed away their naming rights to Saban, and thus cannot self-identify as "Jay and Silent Bob" ever again.
Furious, Jay and Silent Bob visit Brodie Bruce (Jason Lee), whose store, Brodie's Secret Stash, now operates at the abandoned mall. He tells them about the Bluntman and Chronic reboot, which is being directed by Kevin Smith. The film is largely completed already, but a large action scene is to be shot at the annual fan convention Chronic-Con in Hollywood. Jay and Bob have three days to get to Los Angeles to stop the film from being completed and win back their identities. When the two learn that they are on a No-Fly List, they steal an arrogant businessman's (Ralph Garman) credit card information and order a Ride Me Now to California.
They arrive in Chicago, but when the driver (Fred Armisen) confesses that he has never smoked marijuana, Jay gives him a joint to enjoy as his first. He smokes outside of Mooby’s, where he is immediately arrested while Jay and Bob are distracted. After placing an order, Jay looks at a nearby TV and recognizes Justice (Shannon Elizabeth), his former girlfriend, who is now a weatherperson. Jay and Bob find where Justice lives and pay her a visit. Justice faints in surprise and the duo are then knocked out and taken prisoner by a girl wearing a hockey mask. They awaken, tied up in Justice's living room, where Justice tells Jay he left her heartbroken by never visiting her in jail. She has since married and given birth to their love child, named Millennium Faulken (Harley Quinn Smith). She introduces Jay to their daughter, but urges Jay to never reveal his identity to her. Outside, Millennium (known as "Milly"), revealed to be the same masked girl from earlier, introduces Jay and Silent Bob to her best friend Soapy (Treshelle Edmond), who is deaf and communicates in sign language.
Justice leaves for vacation with her wife Reggie (Rosario Dawson), and Milly forces Jay to take her to Hollywood with him and Bob. They reluctantly agree and take the ride-share. Milly drugs Jay and Bob with a very strong edible, which leads to a dream in which Jay receives parenting advice from Redman and Method Man, the stars of Jay's favorite film How High. They wake up on a highway in New Orleans, where they meet Milly's two other friends, Jihad (Aparna Brielle) and Shan Yu (Alice Wen). They tell Jay that they want to visit Chronic-Con because Shan Yu, an immigrant from China, is a huge fan of the first Bluntman and Chronic film and it is her dream to attend Chronic-Con before she has to return to China. They steal a van from a victim Milly seduced through a pedophile chatroom and drive to California. Jay, wanting to be protective of his daughter, asks about her friends. He learns that Jihad was brought to America after her brother tried to kill her for being sexually assaulted. Milly admits that her behavior is attributed to her never knowing her father.
Jay and Bob are abandoned once again at a Mooby's, and are confronted by their first ride-share driver, angry at the two for ruining his life. Jay and Bob steal his car and search for the van. They find the van in a vacant area, where the Ku Klux Klan are having a rally. They have kidnapped the girls and plan to kill them. Bob steals a klan hood and passes himself off as the new Grand Dragon to distract them while Jay rescues the girls. In the van, they throw a portable toilet at the Klansmen, covering them in feces, and the group flees from the scene. They make it to California, where Jay tries to bond with Milly, still never revealing their relation per Justice's wishes. They make it to Chronic-Con where they sneak in. Jay and Bob split with the girls, as they plan to ruin the shoot, but the girls want to be extras in the film to fulfill Shan Yu's dream. They agree to part ways, with Jay hugging Milly and letting her know he is proud of her.
Jay and Bob try to sneak past a familiar security guard (Diedrich Bader), who chases them through panel after panel. They hide in an empty panel room where they are met by Holden McNeil (Ben Affleck). He has just finished recording a podcast with Alyssa Jones (Joey Lauren Adams), who is adapting Holden's Chasing Amy comic into a Netflix original series. The two have maintained a platonic friendship over the years and Holden has donated his sperm to Alyssa and her wife (Virginia Smith) so they may have a child, whom he helps co-parent. He introduces Jay and Bob to their daughter, Amy (Logan Lee Mewes). Holden tells Jay that fatherhood gave him a new purpose in life. This inspires Jay to abort their mission and be a father to Milly. Holden gives them VIP badges, which grants him and the girls access to the panel with Kevin Smith. After showing a clip of the film, Smith goes backstage to take a break before shooting the big scene. Noticing that Bob bears a great resemblance to Smith, Milly sneaks backstage and knocks out Smith, giving Bob Smith's clothes to disguise himself. They bring Milly and Shan Yu on stage to film the scene, but Shan Yu sees through their ruse and knocks Bob unconscious, bringing out the real Kevin Smith. Bob is thrown out of the hall and Shan Yu reveals herself to be a Russian spy, bent on destroying American pop culture conventions. After Jay insults Shan Yu, she turns her gun on him, at which point he reveals to Milly that he is her father. Bob regains consciousness outside and steals a large metal "Iron Bob" suit that was to be used in the filming of the scene. Controlling the suit, Bob incites a riot at the panel and disarms Shan Yu and her henchmen.
After making their way back home, Jay shows Milly the Quick Stop. Bob brings them coffee as Jay tells Milly his stories of his and Bob's adventures, including meeting Justice. Dante Hicks (Brian O'Halloran) arrives to open Quick Stop and bemoans the fact that the steel shutters are once again jammed closed.
In a post-credits scene, Jay tells Milly that for the past twenty-five years, he and Bob have been pranking Dante by jamming gum in the locks.
A number of Hollywood stars make cameos as themselves, including Jason Biggs and James Van Der Beek, similar to their appearance in Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, Method Man and Redman in Jay and Silent Bob's hallucination, Chris Hemsworth via a holographic projection at Chronic-Con, Robert Kirkman during the credits, Keith Coogan, and Stan Lee, who makes a posthumous appearance in a mid-credits scene through the use of archive footage of himself and Smith taken from San Diego Comic-Con.
In addition to playing the roles of Dante and Grant Hicks, Brian O'Halloran also appears as himself alongside Marilyn Ghigliotti, Ernie O'Donnell, Scott Schiaffo, and John Willyung for a Clerks 25th Anniversary panel at Chronic-Con. Walt Flanagan, Bryan Johnson, Ming Chen, and Mike Zapcic appear as themselves during a Comic Book Men reunion panel. Actors Chris Wood, Jesse Rath, Ben Gleib, and Fatman Beyond co-host Marc Bernardin appear as convention attendees.
In a mid-credits scene, Jake Richardson and Nick Fehlinger reprise their roles from Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back as the two young men that used to buy marijuana from Jay and Silent Bob.
Following Clerks II, news has appeared often of other titles to be released in the View Askewniverse; these would include Clerks III and Mallrats 2. In 2017, Kevin Smith had confirmed that those projects were cancelled for several reasons, but revealed he had written a new film starring Jay and Silent Bob titled Jay and Silent Bob Reboot. The script was already finished when it was announced and it was said that Miramax would produce it. It was announced on January 25, 2019 that Saban Films had acquired distribution rights to the film in association with Universal Pictures. It is the first film in the View Askewniverse not to be produced by Scott Mosier, and the first film in the View Askewniverse since Mallrats not to be produced by Harvey and Bob Weinstein.
Filming was initially set to begin mid-2017, then moved to August 2018, then to November of that same year. After the various delays, filming finally began on February 25, 2019 in New Orleans exactly one year after Smith suffered a massive and near-fatal heart attack.
During the filming of the movie, Smith released a weekly documentary called Road to Reboot, showing what is being filmed that week.
Production wrapped on March 27, 2019 after 21 days of shooting, which was the same number of days it took Smith to film his first movie, Clerks, 26 years earlier.
Mewes and Smith were attached to star as early as the film's announcement.
Comic book writer Stan Lee was initially cast as himself in the film in July 2017, but due to his death on November 12, 2018, Lee will instead get a tribute within the film at Brodie Bruce's comics shop. The film's original third act was to revolve around Lee, with an extended performance from him as a main character; however, given principal photography on the film did not commence until three months after Lee's death, the entire third act of the script was rewritten.
Ben Affleck was initially not involved in the film at all, due to a feud with Smith. When Affleck was asked in an interview on if he got the call for Reboot, he said that "Your guess is as good as mine." After hearing about that interview, Smith wrote in a scene with Affleck's character Holden McNeil and wrote in a mini-sequel to his 1997 film Chasing Amy. Smith became more excited for that not only did he get Affleck in the film, but that he also got his "... BOYFRIEND BACK!"
The film was released on October 15, 2019, as part of two Fathom Events showings. The first showing on October 15 gave away a limited edition poster of the film, and the second on October 17 was a double feature with Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back.
Following the Fathom showings, Smith embarked on a North American roadshow tour with a presentation of the film, followed by a Q&A session. The roadshow began on October 19 in Asbury Park, New Jersey and will continue until February 26, 2020 in New Orleans, Louisiana. The tour will expand internationally near the beginning of 2020.
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 65% based on 26 reviews, with a weighted average of 6.28/10. On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 46 out of 100, based on 7 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
Writing for The A. V. Club, Ignatiy Vishnevetsky called this installment "crude and lazy", giving it a D+ for crass humor and summing up the plot as "a succession of crudely drawn-out puns, painfully winking self-references, and underwhelming, listlessly directed cameos".
JoBlo.com's Paul Shirey gave the film an 8/10 and stated, "As comedy is so exceptionally subjective and this film so clearly tied to a somewhat niche appeal, I can only grade it as a fully biased fan of Smith, even if some of his flicks never worked for me, while others touched my cinematic nerve. As a fully Kevin Smith/Jay and Silent Bob comedy with a hefty amount of laughs and heart, this View Askew flick rates among his better works and cemented my resolve to happily revisit these wacky Jersey boys in another decade or so with pleasure."
