Atos Syntel
Industry IT services, IT consulting
Founded Troy, Michigan, United States 1980 (1980)
Founder Amey gadre
Headquarters Bezons
Key people Rakesh Khanna, CEO Anil Agrawal, CFO Ramkumar Singampalli, Chief Delivery Officer
Services IT, business consulting and outsourcing services
Parent Atos
Website wwwatos syntelnet
Atos Syntel is a division of Atos and a multinational provider of integrated technology and business services. The company is led by Rakesh Khanna. Atos Syntel was created by the acquisition of Syntel, Inc. by Atos S.E., which was announced on July 22, 2018 and completed on October 9, 2018.
Originally founded in 1980 as Syntel International by Bharat Desai and Neerja Sethi in Troy, Michigan Syntel began by providing software staffing services to local corporations like General Motors (US), and some major governmental units, earning $30,000 in its first year.
Syntel's early growth prompted their leadership to explore additional service offerings to augment the core IT staffing business. In 1989, Syntel began providing development and maintenance services to its clients.
In 1992, with new development centers in India, Syntel began software outsourcing services with an onsite-offshore model, which connected software developers in India to project managers at client locations via an international telecommunications network.
Atos Syntel provides IT services such as traditional application development and maintenance, data warehousing and business intelligence, as well as digital services like social media, mobile, cloud, analytics, IoT and AI and automation-powered solutions.
The company markets its services to enterprises in the banking and financial services, insurance, healthcare and life sciences, retail, logistics and telecom, and manufacturing sectors. Integral to its operating model are the use of offshore centers to deliver IT and KPO services.[citation needed]
Atos Syntel operates facilities in the United States, United Kingdom, Germany and offshore software development centers in Mumbai, Chennai, Tirunelveli, Hyderabad, Gurgaon and Pune, India, as well as Manila, Philippines. The Company's U.S.-based development centers are located in Phoenix, Arizona, Nashville, Tennessee, and Memphis, Tennessee.
The first Syntel offshore development centers were established in Mumbai in 1992, with centers opening in Chennai soon after. In 2005, Syntel opened a large technology campus in Pune. In May, 2010, Syntel also opened the first phase of a 27-acre (110,000 m2) technology campus in Chennai, India.
Rakesh Khanna is the CEO of Atos Syntel and a member of the Atos Executive Committee. He previously served as Syntel's CEO and President from November 3, 2016  until the October, 2018 merger with Atos. He previously served as Syntel's Chief Operating Officer January 2012 until November 2016, and as President of the Banking and Financial Services Business Unit from 2005 until 2012.
