Walter Jon Williams

Born 1953 (age 6667) Duluth, Minnesota
Occupation Writer
Residence Los Lunas, New Mexico
Nationality American
Education BA
Alma mater University of New Mexico
Period 1981present
Genre Science fiction Nautical fiction (as Jon Williams)
Notable awards Nebula Award
Website
walterjonwilliamsnet
Walter Jon Williams (born 1953) is an American writer, primarily of science fiction. Previously he wrote nautical adventure fiction under the name Jon Williams, in particular, a series of historical novels set during the age of sail, Privateers and Gentlemen (1981–1984).
As Jon Williams, he designed the game Heart of Oak (1982) and Privateers and Gentlemen (1983) for Fantasy Games Unlimited.:74 A Cyberpunk RPG sourcebook called Hardwired (1989) was licensed by R. Talsorian Games, based on the 1986 novel of the same name by Williams.:209
Several of Williams' novels have a distinct cyberpunk feel to them,[according to whom?] notably Hardwired (also an homage to Roger Zelazny's novel Damnation Alley),[citation needed] Voice of the Whirlwind and Angel Station. He has, however, explored a number of different styles and genres, including farce (Drake Maijstral series), postcyberpunk space opera (Aristoi), military science fiction (Dread Empire's Fall series), alternative history (Wall, Stone, Craft), science fantasy/arcanepunk (Metropolitan and City on Fire), disaster thriller (The Rift), a Star Wars novel (The New Jedi Order: Destiny's Way), fantasy (Quillifer), and historical adventure (Privateers and Gentlemen series), and police procedural (Days of Atonement), usually in a science fiction context. He has also contributed to some of the Wild Cards cooperative novels.
Williams was born in Duluth, Minnesota and graduated from the University of New Mexico, where he received his BA degree in 1975. He currently lives in Valencia County, south of Albuquerque in New Mexico.
Williams played roleplaying games (in a group with other sf authors including George R. R. Martin and Melinda Snodgrass, becoming a contributor to their Wild Cards series), and has written both fiction and rulebooks for the games Privateers and Gentlemen from Fantasy Games Unlimited and Cyberpunk from R. Talsorian Games.[citation needed]
In 2006, Williams founded the Taos Toolbox, a two-week writer's workshop for fantasy and science fiction writers.
In 2017, Williams was the Guest of Honor at the 75th World Science Fiction Convention, held in Helsinki.
