Worldwar series
The Worldwar series is the fan name given to a series of alternate history science fiction novels by Harry Turtledove. Its premise is an alien invasion of Earth during World War II, and includes Turtledove's Worldwar tetralogy; as well as the Colonization trilogy; and the novel Homeward Bound. The series' time-span ranges from 1942–2031. The early series was nominated for a Sidewise Award for Alternate History in 1996.
Worldwar deals with a military invasion which begins on or around May 30, 1942, by a force of aliens who call themselves the Race, a reptilian species. They had reached Earth orbit in December 1941, but delayed their attack for various reasons.
Although the Race has the advantage of superior technology, their information on humanity had been collected by robotic probe during the 12th century AD. The invaders are surprised to find that humanity had progressed far more rapidly than any other species which they had previously studied and conquered. Contrary to their expectations, at the time of invasion, the Race's technology is only marginally more advanced than the contemporaneous 20th century Earth technology. Their commander hesitates, and considers turning back without revealing their presence to the humans, but finally decides to avoid the disgrace of that course of action.
The narrative follows the intersecting fortunes of a large number of human and alien characters. Notably, the series depicts how the Axis and Allied powers must cooperate to fight the alien menace.
As gradually comes out, the Race unified its home planet into a single state at a time when their military technology was at a level similar to the late 20th Century of our history. After that, they had tens of thousands of years of further history, but for most of this time they did not fight any wars and had no incentive and no need to develop more advanced weapons. Indeed, for most of the time they maintained no army at all. Only when discovering other planets with intelligent beings did their Emperor proclaim a "Soldier's Time" and build up an army, and the weapons developed at the last wars when their home planet was unified were quite enough to conquer these other planets. With Earth it turned out differently - the various human nations were faced with arms some decades ahead of theirs, but were soon able to close the gap.
Turtledove approaches the novels' science fiction scenario with less of a focus on the technological and fantasy elements that are typically associated with the genre. He shows greater concern for the role of more mundane affairs such as the political repercussions of an alliance between the Allied and Axis powers, the impact the presence of alien creatures has on human society, and the ways in which warfare is paradoxically a hindrance to civilization and simultaneously a catalyst for the progress of civilization.
The first series is made up of four volumes:
It ends with neither humanity nor the aliens triumphing. Instead, each side fights to the point that they face mutually-assured destruction and settle into an uneasy ceasefire. The aliens want to colonize Earth and have nuclear weapons but want to use them only sparingly. They cannot colonize a radioactive wasteland after a full-scale nuclear exchange.
The invasion ultimately ends when all of the major Allied and Axis powers manage to develop their own nuclear weapons, resulting in a stalemate. The Race is left in control of roughly half the planet, primarily colonial possessions in the Southern Hemisphere: Africa, South and Central America, Australia, and most of Asia aside from the Soviet Union and a few Japanese coastal holdings.
The second series of novels, set in the 1960s, deals with the interaction between surviving humans and the Race. Opening with the arrival of the colonization fleet, the series ends with the defeat of Nazi Germany and the establishment of a permanently-manned US space station in the asteroid belt. Part of the series focuses on the Reich-Race War of the mid-60s, when the Greater German Reich and the Race fought a nuclear war.
The Germans lose and are forced to allow France to become an independent nation again under a new Fourth Republic. Nonetheless, it is a costly victory for the Race: fighting Germany on its own after 20 years of human technological advancement proved to be much more difficult than fighting all free human nations earlier. It is left obvious to both sides that long-term trends are in humanity's favor.
The final novel in the saga deals with humanity reaching the Race's homeworld, "Home" (Tau Ceti II).
The following is a list of some of the major characters from the series.
Numerous historical characters also appear, some for brief cameos; others have significant parts in the plot:
